
========================
DOCUMENT 1
========================

CONTENT:
This is one of the best books I have ever read. I hate the mother in this book. I hate her with the gut instinct evolution passed down to me to avoid parasites. And more importantly, I hated the mother from the first moment we meet her. And like, how do you do that? How do you pull that off? How do you make someone feel so much in just one scene? Camille. She opened the door and stood in the doorway. Didn't seem surprised. Didn't offer a hug at all. Not even the limp one I'd expected. Is something the matter? No, mama. Not at all. I'm in town on business. Business? Business? Well, goodness. I'm sorry, sweetheart. Come in. Come in. The house is not up to par for a visitor, I'm afraid. The house was perfect. Down to the dozens of cut tulips and vases at the entry hall. The air was so teasy with pollen, my eyes warted. Uh, where are you staying? Funny you should ask that. I was hoping I could stay here just for a few days. a quick pause. Her long fingernails are transparent pink clicked on her glass. Well, I'm sure that's fine. There is so much at work here in just her first scene. In just that first line, when she sees her daughter for the first time in years, and she treats it like a burden. There's the frustrating condescension of someone with a perfect house, insisting, "Oh, it's just terrible." While knowing that you're a bit of a mess. We all know people like that. There is the resistance to even the simple gesture of offering a room. But I'm not done, and neither is she. That scene isn't over. My hair was a different color, brown from red, but she didn't seem to notice. She looked exactly the same, though, not much older than I am now, although she's in her late 40s, glowing, pale skin with long blonde hair and pale blue eyes. She was like a girl's very best doll, the kind you don't play with. Those little girls, Anne Nash and Natalie Keane, I prompted. I'm covering it for my paper. Oh, Camille, I knew those children. Camille, I'm having a very hard time, as you can imagine. dead little girls. Who would do that? I just can't have that kind of talk around me about hurt children. Just don't tell me what you're doing. Don't tell me anything you know. I'll pretend you're here for summer break. How's Emma? I asked to change the subject. Amma? My mother looked alarmed as if she suddenly remembered she had left her child somewhere. She's fine. She's upstairs asleep. Why do you ask? Again, there's just so much here. There's her wanting to make the dead kids about her and her pain. her taking ownership of the suffering of others and pretending it's her own. Have you met people like this before? Then there's her sticking her head in the sand about it all, drawing all the attention to herself and then insisting she can't talk about it whatsoever. Then there's the passive aggressive undertones. Then treating the narrator as if asking about her sister Emma is being invasive. Every line makes you react and feel something and all of which leaves a powerful impression of who this character is and what you want to do to them. Describing her as the kind of doll you don't play with has so many layers to it. Someone untouchable, someone ruthless, someone not quite real. And that's all great, but you would be forgiven for missing what really makes this introduction so brilliant. Because Flynn isn't just showing us any random character traits and strengths and weaknesses and what the character looks like. She's giving us a microcosm of the story to come and this character's place in it. She's giving us characteristics relevant to the tension in this story, the ones which foreshadow later plot twists, which I won't tell you because you should read this book. She's giving us the core relationship dynamic that really underpins the mystery in this story. Fundamentally, she's giving us a lens through which to see and feel this story to come because you're not just introducing who a character is, what they look like, etc. You are introducing a new piece of your story and those are not the same thing. The mother's introduction works because it is a microcosm of the story to come through the lens of that character. [music] This whole story will turn on this tense, distant but possessive dynamic. This desire to keep armor for herself. Think of it like a chess game. Introducing a character is moving a piece into position so you can execute a plan later on. You move lots of pieces into position just like you introduce lots of characters. And all of them work together to pull the story off. Even a piece as powerful as the queen is only pushed onto the board in such a way that it works with all the other pieces big and small to checkmate your opponent. In this sense, you're almost never introducing people on their own. You're introducing this web of characters which underpins the themes and narrative and that grand strategy you're pulling off. and how that web works, which pieces connect and check each other and support each other, which don't is often more important than who each character is on their own, or who each piece is on their own. Not to mention, no vibrating butt plug required for this one. I have to give a shout out to Full Metal Alchemist Brotherhood here, which is one of my favorite series ever made because it paints such vivid characters, partly through its use of these microcosmic introduction scenes, because it becomes even more important to give a succinct idea of what a character's role in the story architecture will be when you've got these worlds [music] and stories with such big casts of characters. Flynn could have given us anything about the mother, her favorite color, how educated she is, why she believes that coconut mounds are objectively the best chocolate bar, which is true, and I will die on that hill. but instead she gives us the pieces which intersect with all the other pieces of the story. So ask yourself, what are you setting up with your character's introduction? What role do they play in the thematic and structural makeup of your story? What is the reader meant to feel towards them and the story all the way at the end that you can sew the seeds for in their first scene because not all character traits are equal and some might be important to who a character is but not important to the role that they play in the story. Like Daenerys's opening chapter in a game of thrones is packed full of these little moments where other people control her and her life and what she can do and what she can't do. Her brother, her servant, and there are all these little violations. Why? Because her story is one about finding agency in this world. Captain Jack Sparrow's opening is funny, not just because it shows us who Jack is, but because it immediately gives us the tone of the story. I want to read you a passage from a story called Umwelt, which is a German word for the sensory experience of a given creature. You're lying here before me. frail as can be. And you look so different to how I remember you from my childhood. Back then you could put me on your shoulders and carry the baskets full to bursting all the way home up the mountain every day. Mama, mama, I say and I probably sound like your little girl again. I'm here. I'm here and I do love you. Please don't think I abandoned you. But your eyes are closed and you stir only lightly when I pick up your hand. You've been sleeping for 3 days now, and the doctors say your fever came so quickly. I know you believe four is the number of death, or at least you used to. It dawns on me that I don't truly have any idea what you believe anymore. And you remember me only as the girl who left you. Please, Mama, I need you to know I came home for you. I need you to know I didn't throw your letters away. Um is about a naturalist who can slip into the minds of other animals. She's searching for a dragon. But the story is really about the character's relationship with her mother. So, the story doesn't start by telling us that she has this amazing magical power to merge with the minds of other creatures, even though that is pretty critical to her character. No, that shows up a few pages later. Instead, it starts by introducing us to the distance in their relationship and this desire to get inside her mother's head, which the character actually does manage to later in the story. There's that microcosm for the character in the story. Again, the story appears in Unbroken: Masters of Fantasy, a book of stories from authors like Brandon Sanderson, Terry Brooks, Christopher Palini, Jenny WZ, Jim Butcher, and me. Yeah. Uh, pretty crazy that I can say that. Um, is my story published in that book alongside these legendary authors. And you can go read it. You can go get the book right now. 800 pages of some of the most incredible fantasy writers to have ever lived. And I don't say that about me. I say that about these other incredible people who I am stoked to be uh published alongside. I think Unwelt is possibly the best thing I have ever written. That includes all the stories I wrote in a catalog for the end of humanity. All of my videos which are kind of, you know, they're creative works in themselves. Unbroken is happening to help an amazing guy and writer called Peter Aulion tackle some medical debt because the US healthcare system has basically screwed him over. The fact we're even kind of doing this tells you everything you need to know, but it also speaks to the power of the writing community coming together to do this. We've already raised bing almost a million dollars. The Kickstarter is only available this month. So, you've got to get it now or it's gone. Poof, bam, whippity-w. And if you want to read my other stuff, then go pick up a catalog for the end of humanity. And if you enjoy these writing and worldbuilding videos, if you find them helpful and you want to go deeper, then uh pick up my own writing and worldbuilding series, which take all of these discussions and put them into these easier to readers and reference books uh with more detail, more examples, better examples, and analysis. uh 100,000 copies or so sold so far. Thank you so much if you've already got them. Links are all down below. This is the cover for the Japanese edition of Onriting and World Building volumes one and two. How cool is this? Insane. I think it's better than the cover I've got. All three cover different topics. You can get them in any order, but volume 3 is my favorite and volume four is coming later this year, I hope. But there is something to say that even if you introduce a character through that microcosm, that doesn't make them interesting. No. To make them interesting, I think you need a part two character hook. If it sounds complicated, it's because writing is complicated. A plot hook is that little question, that little tease, which usually shows up in the first chapter and makes you go, "Huh, I could spend 40 hours of my life paying attention to this instead of The Secret Lives of Mormon Wives." Also, if you want to see the most frustrating example of a plot hook, go watch any of these like reality TV shows where they show you coming up on this episode and it's like all of the most dramatic moments crammed together and then you watch the episode and then realize that that is the entire episode all crammed into that start. I kind of hate that I know that. Stuff like a bomb goes off, we see a dead body, a bomb goes off, and then there are lots of dead bodies. Great plot hooks get you turning the page. Cheap ones snag attention with shock value, but very rarely do they make a character interesting on their own. And this is a problem I actually ran into with the threebody problem. The story opens with us learning that a bunch of scientists working on really high-end technologies have all killed themselves. [music] Why? Great plot hook, but our main character, Wang, really doesn't do or say anything interesting. He's just along for the ride. He's kind of a voice for the science. We're not given much of anything to latch on to or feel with him. He's not that memorable. So much so that even though I remember the plot of this book incredibly well, I had to look up what his name was. I don't think it's a surprise that they radically changed his character for the Netflix TV series. This is not me saying plot- driven books are bad or that everything has to be characterdriven. You know, a lot of classic sci-fi kind of like this doesn't have particularly strong characters and that's fine. But I got the feeling that Cishanu did want Wang to be interesting because some of his other characters are. And so the best character introductions come with what I'm going to call a character hook. The other side of the narrative coin. This is one of the strangest books I have ever read. The library at Mount Char by Scott Hawkins. A godlike man called father kidnaps a bunch of children and raises them to have sort of divine powers. The plot hook is that father has just disappeared. Where too? Why? What for? Great plot hook. But look at how we're introduced to Carolyn, the supposedly weakest of the children and the main character. David studied her for a moment with his killer's eyes. Seeing no hint of rebellion, he nodded and turned away. Of course, genuine emotion is the very essence of self. It cannot be unfelt cannot be ignored, but it may be hidden. Carolyn's smile was just the right amount of forced. Anyone who bothered to peek in on her thoughts would only find concern for father, and a sincere, if slightly nervous, desire to please David. But in her heart the hate of them blazed like a black sun. This is only part of the opening, but by the end of it, Caroline is introduced as someone with an agenda. On first reading, we think that this line about David seeing no hint of rebellion in her eyes is because she isn't rebellious. But it's a pun. It's got a double meaning. It's actually the opposite. It's that David is unable to see the rebellion in her because Carolyn is extremely good at reading others and controlling what they think about her, hiding her true intentions. This first chapter is littered with her hiding her true feelings and controlling how she expresses herself and holds herself to get the right reaction out of others. And all of this left me with a burning desire to see what Carolyn would do next. Just like the plot hook leaves you with a desire to see what's going to happen next in the plot. When people say active characters who drive the plot are more interesting than passive characters who react to it, they're kind of wrong. That's way too big a sweeping generalization. But what they're kind of getting at is that it's easier to give an active character a character hook like Carolyn's Agenda. But there are tons of ways to give a character a character hook. Like let's look at objectively one of the best character introductions ever made. You know what it is, it's of course the one, the only. [music] Not only does this scene tell us everything we need to know about Captain Jack Sputter with him barely saying a word, that this is a man for whom being captain is a mindset. He's got a romantic view of the world, undeterred and ever the optimist in his own way, and yet a captain of nothing. But more importantly, the character hook here is that he is creative. He's clever, and he solves problems in funny, lucky ways, which shouldn't work. You are without doubt the worst pirate I've ever heard of. But you have heard of me. >> From the first moment, we want to see how he solves other problems, which he soon does. The story gives us that in spades. how a character solves problems can be a great character hook, especially if you don't get the plot hook till a little later. But if you're not doing that, then maybe make them a drug addict. He was sure he'd said whatever, which in retrospect worried him because it might have sounded as if he didn't care at all. Not at all. So little that it wouldn't matter as if she forgot to get it or call. And once he had made the decision to have marijuana in his home one more time, it mattered a lot. It mattered a lot. He had been too casual with the woman. He should have made her take $1,250 from him upfront, claiming politeness, claiming he didn't want to inconvenience her financially over something so trivial and casual. Money created a sense of obligation, and he should have wanted the woman to feel obliged to do what she said she'd do. Once what she'd said she had do had set him off inside. Once he had been set off inside, it mattered so much more that he was somehow afraid to show how much it mattered. This whole chapter of David Foster Wallace's Infinite Jest is all about an addict hyperfixating on whether and when he's going to get his next fix. when this woman who's going to turn up with his drugs but not wanting to look like he is an addict so you know how should he stand and speak and how should he have reminded her so as to be casual but not sound desperate how he rationalizes his addiction to himself oh I'll blow it all at once and it'll be such a negative experience that I'll never want to do it again which of course definitely makes sense the more drugs you have the less addiction you've got the character here doesn't really have an agenda like Carolyn well he wants drugs but I found myself just utterly transfixed reading through this guy's weird obsessive psychological experience. And I think the character hook works here because I truly believe that if you delve deep enough into the nooks and crannies of any interesting psychological experience, then it's going to be fascinating to read. If you actually delve deep and hard enough, then you can get that. If Flynn can turn a description of a childhood home into a psychological case study of a dysfunctional family, then you can turn your Warhammer 40k addiction into a look at what a religious upbringing does to a person. Addiction is naturally interesting, but anything can be if you go deep enough. Publishing right now is really big on fast flashy starts. You know, the inciting incident on page one, your first line should make everything explode. And that so often ends up with these big flashy plot hooks with fireworks and dead body and a limp wet character hook. Because in a sense, your character introduction is your story introduction and it is easier to just make everything explode, right? So, take this as an exercise. Consider starting your story as deep in your character's psyche as you possibly can. And see where that takes your pros, what interesting things you discover about this character and their emotions and their experience. Because remember, an explosion at the star will only carry the narrative as long as there's smoke. An interesting character will carry the narrative anywhere. Other times, all you really need is a character with a really interesting outlook or philosophy. Ursula Kelloggwin's The Day Before the Revolution is written from the perspective of an old revolutionary looking back on the past and all they've achieved and has these curious turns of phrase. A proper body is not an object, not an implement, not a belonging to be admired. It's just you yourself. Only when it's no longer you, but yours, a thing owned. Do you worry about it? Is it in good shape? Will it do? Will it last? Or consider Claraara and the Sun by Kazawa Ishigro about an android companion standing in a shop window hoping to be bored who has this wonderfully optimistic if naive view of the world. So the way she describes the tint of the brick building, the different kinds of shoes people wear, how the sun cuts across the pavement, it all takes on this magical wondrous feeling that you can't help but become attached to as she points out things that you probably ignore that you've filtered out because you've lost the capacity to see the wonder in the little things. You'll know this as well as me. You've only got one shot at introducing a character. So, you've got to be ruthless. Ruthless with which characteristics and blind spots and strengths and weaknesses you show off that one, establish your character, and two, give us that microcosm with their role in it. Han spends one line telling us Carolyn was fond of a dress that she has to throw [music] away at the start of the book, but he spends several paragraphs showing us how good she is at lying. Not just because it tells us who the character is, but because Caroline's deception is the story. But if you've read Infinite JS, you'll be screaming at me right now, Tim, that's a weird chapter to use. And it is. It absolutely is because that character Diddy, uh, he gets the second chapter of the book and yet he barely appears in the story. And so why why would you possibly do that? Well, Infiniteest is a bizarre story. You might just put it down to that bizarness. But I think there is another reason. Infiniteest is a story about addiction in all of its forms. You meet a bunch of characters who are struggling with it one way or another. what it does to you, how you come back from it, how you escape it, how we justify it to ourselves. And all of that is upfront and raw unfiltered stream of consciousness in that second chapter. Erd's introduction isn't just showing us who he is. It's introducing a core theme of the story and giving us a lens through which to understand the other POV characters. Because then when others talk about addiction, we recognize those behaviors and a little voice in your head is wondering if well they're doing the same mental gymnastics that Erdi is. This is all about that microcosm, giving the reader the tools to see the big picture and for you to checkmate them when you've moved all your pieces into position and you execute your grand strategy. So in that sense, that chapter infinite gest is really not so much about the character than it is about the wider story that Matt is overall. and it's a great example of how weird and varied character introductions can be. So ask yourself, what's your plot hook in your story and what's your character hook? Consider giving them an agenda and emotionally complex state to drag us into a unique outlook that enders us to them or makes us feel something or give them a creative way of solving problems. Sometimes the plot and character hooks are two different ways to get invested in the same story like Pirates of the Caribbean, but other times they work together like the library of Mount Cha where Caroline's deception and agenda only really matter. character hook because plot hook, father has disappeared. Now, all of this is downstream from advice you've definitely heard before that a character's first scene should tell you who they are. Now, some people take this to an extreme and say that their first line should summarize their character. Think like Daisy in The Great Gatsby, where her first line is, "Oh, I'm paralyzed with happiness." with a bunch of empty laughter. [laughter] [screaming] And Fitzgerald is brilliant here because this is a woman who feels paralyzed and utterly devoid of any real substantial joy. So she masks it with all this performative partying and stuff. But letting your characters do things, you know, solving problems big and small not only moves the plot forward, but it does give that exposition more naturally. This does touch on show don't tell, which I won't get into here, but I've got a whole other video which you should watch. Part three, the double introduction. What do John Wick and Jay Gatsby have in common? Well, they're both hard as Both characters are sort of introduced twice, and their stories use that double introduction structure very intentionally. We first meet Wick as this grieving loner, reserved, but respectful, kind of vulnerable after he gets beaten in his own home and his dog is killed. And then we meet the real John Wick. >> Cuz you stole John Wick's car, sir, and uh killed his dog. Oh, >> there's this great scene where he lumbers down into the basement. the shadowy figure with a sledgehammer where he breaks apart the concrete to dig up his guns. Fear not the man with a gun at his side, but the man who will break apart the earth to get the guns he buried back. [music] The sharp contrast between these two versions of the same character, the whiplash we get, his identity withheld at first makes who he is more memorable, and we get the feel of who this guy is before he really kills anyone at all. The same sort of thing happens with Gatsby. We're introduced to him through other people as a German spy, a mobster, a murderer, a war herer, a scholar, only then to meet him with all these expectations, and he's both so much more and less than that. This also sees the story with the themes of Gatsby. He is living a lie, a false identity made up to impress others. He invites the imagination of other people. Withholding something about a character makes people want to know more about them. and contrasting who they're first presented as with who they truly are makes the trait that you withhold more memorable and interesting in a [music] sense at least at first. This is a typical way to make exposition more interesting generally to withhold it and make it a bit of a secret, something the characters have to figure out and the reader. Having other characters introduce someone before we meet them also allows the reader to imagine and project depth onto them. This is especially effective for characters who you want to have a sense of presence like Wick and Gatsby, villains and heroes who have all had an impact on the people around them. This itself works as the character hook we talked about. And also, you've definitely seen this tactic before a lot more than you think. Because what is backstory if not introducing a character one way and then introducing them again in a fundamentally different light? Intentionally withholding a villain's backstory lets you manipulate the reader into hating them at first. Intentionally withholding a hero's backstory allows you to manipulate the reader into loving them before that reveal. But ask yourself, are you withholding your backstory to make the character more interesting or because you have an awkward timeline problem? Part four, give them something to disagree with. Okay, so you've definitely heard these lines before. All happy families are alike. Each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way. It is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a wife. Those are the famous opening lines of Anacarinina and Pride and Prejudice. But I want to share another kind of line from Herukqi Murakami's An independent organ. There are people in the world who, thanks to a lack of intellectual acuity, live a life that is surprisingly artificial. Now, these might not feel like you're introducing a character. Nobody is named, no dialogue is given, no decisions are made. But aphorisms like this do one implicitly place a character in a strange position like an unhappy family with unique problems and two [music] they give the reader something to agree or disagree with. How ridiculous. Single wealthy men are famously not in want of a wife. An independent organ is ironic because the whole story goes on to prove that like people you think are boring are actually really complex on the inside and you just haven't given it enough thought. So consider introducing a character by giving the reader something to interpret or argue with. Christopher Richio does this like very explicitly in the opening chapter to Empire of Silence. I make no excuses, no denials, no apologies for what I have done. I know what I am, but perhaps you will read on tempted by the thought of reading the work of so great a monster as the one made in my image. You will not let me be forgotten because you want to know what it was like to stand aboard that impossible ship and rip out the heart of a star. You want to feel the heat of two civilizations burning and to meet the dragon, the devil that wears the same name my father gave me. The book asks, "How will you view this man as a hero, a villain, a scholar, a demon? How will you interpret his violence to come?" And it kind of mixes the plot and character hook as well. You know, you get the scale of the story. This is going to be about war and there it's going to span planets and an empire and our character is going to be active and a pivotal part of it and he's going to go and do something really cool. It dangles that promise of an agenda we spoke about before. Saying your main character loves sword fighting is introducing them. But saying every man who wields a blade must be a man of honor gives you something to chew on. This video got so long that I end up splitting into two pieces. You know how epic fantasy has a bazillion characters? Like Melazan has like 400 POVs apparently. Wheel of Time 120, A Song of Ice and Fire like 40, uh, Stormlight like 30. How do you possibly manage all of those? Well, I discovered something really interesting. If you want to see that video, then it's going to be going to my patrons first. Link down below. As said, if you like these sorts of videos, if you like my writing, go pick up Unbroken, but also go pick up my own writing and world building books. This has all of the good stuff and more. uh it it allows me to go into more depth and uh better examples and interesting analysis than I ever can in a video. You know, and on YouTube, I have to worry about the algorithm and and how it's going to be framed and pacing and stuff like that. But this allows me to sort of just get into the raw meat of what I'm talking about. And of course, there's a ton of extra stuff which I can only put into the books. I can't put into the videos at all. Links down below. But let's bring all of this back into a summary. Yes, please. All right. Number one, consider how your character introduction can not only introduce your character, but their wider place in the story. The core themes, relationships, and characteristics would give us a lens through which to understand the story. Not all character traits are equal. Two, give your characters a character hook as well as a plot hook. This is the reason to follow them personally. It could be an agenda, an interesting outlook, an immersive psychological experience, or an interesting way of solving problems. And three, aferisms implicitly place characters in interesting situations and give the reader something to agree with or disagree with. But thank you to all my patrons. Thank you to everyone who's get my books. This means a lot. Thank you that I get to do this cool job. It's really really awesome. Stay nerdy and I will see you in the future. Boom.

------------------------

METADATA:
{
  "source": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7siUON2DmhU",
  "type": "youtube_transcript"
}

